Marie Curie was born Maria Skłodowska in Warsaw on 7 November 1867, when the city was part of the Russian Empire. Her father, Władysław Skłodowski, taught mathematics and physics, and her mother, Bronisława, ran a boarding school for girls. Because women could not enroll at the University of Warsaw, Maria studied at the clandestine Flying University and worked as a governess to help pay for her older sister Bronisława's medical studies in Paris.

In 1891 Maria moved to Paris and enrolled at the University of Paris, the Sorbonne, where she earned degrees in physics in 1893 and in mathematics in 1894. In 1894 she met Pierre Curie, an instructor at the School of Physics and Chemistry in Paris who had already discovered piezoelectricity with his brother Jacques Curie. Marie and Pierre married in July 1895 in Sceaux, and she adopted the name Marie Curie. Their daughter Irène was born in 1897 and their daughter Ève in 1904.

For her doctoral research Marie Curie chose the uranium rays that Henri Becquerel had discovered in 1896. Using an electrometer built by Pierre and Jacques Curie, she showed that the radiation came from the uranium atoms themselves, and she coined the term radioactivity. In 1898 she found that the mineral pitchblende was far more active than uranium alone. Working together in a converted shed, Marie and Pierre Curie announced two new elements that year: polonium, named after her native Poland, in July, and radium in December. To isolate a measurable amount of radium chloride, Marie processed several tonnes of pitchblende residue, work she completed in 1902.

In 1903 Marie Curie received her doctorate from the University of Paris, and in December of that year the Nobel Prize in Physics was awarded jointly to Henri Becquerel, Pierre Curie and Marie Curie for their research on radiation. She was the first woman to receive a Nobel Prize. Pierre was appointed professor at the Sorbonne in 1904, and Marie became the head of his laboratory.

Pierre Curie died in April 1906 when he was struck by a horse-drawn wagon on a Paris street. The university offered Marie his chair, and in 1908 she became the first female professor at the Sorbonne. In 1910 she isolated radium metal with André-Louis Debierne and defined an international standard for radioactive emissions; the unit of radioactivity, the curie, was later named in honour of the Curies. In 1911 the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences awarded Marie Curie the Nobel Prize in Chemistry for the discovery of polonium and radium and the isolation of radium. She remains the only person to have won Nobel Prizes in two different sciences. That same year she attended the first Solvay Conference in Brussels, where she met Albert Einstein, who became a lifelong friend.

The Radium Institute in Paris, founded by the University of Paris and the Pasteur Institute, was completed in 1914 with Marie Curie as director of its physics laboratory. When the First World War began, she developed mobile X-ray units, nicknamed "petites Curies", to help surgeons locate shrapnel in wounded soldiers, and she drove the vehicles to the front herself. Her daughter Irène assisted her, and together they trained radiology technicians.

After the war Curie toured the United States in 1921, where the journalist Marie Mattingly Meloney had organised a campaign that raised the money for one gram of radium, presented to Curie by President Warren G. Harding at the White House. She also served on the League of Nations International Committee on Intellectual Cooperation. In 1932 she helped establish the Radium Institute in Warsaw, whose first director was her sister Bronisława.

Marie Curie died on 4 July 1934 at a sanatorium in Passy, France, of aplastic anaemia, almost certainly caused by decades of exposure to radiation. Her laboratory notebooks are still radioactive and are stored in lead-lined boxes at the Bibliothèque nationale de France. In 1935 Irène Joliot-Curie and her husband Frédéric Joliot-Curie received the Nobel Prize in Chemistry for discovering artificial radioactivity. Ève Curie became a writer and published a biography of her mother in 1937. In 1995 the remains of Marie and Pierre Curie were moved to the Panthéon in Paris, making Marie Curie the first woman honoured there for her own achievements.
